+++
date = 2018-11-22T19:59:00+01:00
title = "Cage: the Wayland kiosk"
description = "Cage: the Wayland kiosk"
type = "Active"
+++

Cage is a kiosk compositor for Wayland. A kiosk is a window manager
(in the X11 world) or compositor (in the Wayland world) that is
designed for a user experience wherein user interaction and activities
outside the scope of the running application are prevented. That is, a
kiosk compositor runs a maximized application at a time and prevents
the user from interacting with anything but this application.

As such, user input such as moving, resizing, minimizing and
unmaximizing windows is ignored. Cage supports dialogs, although they
too cannot be resized nor moved. Instead, dialogs are centered on the
screen. Note that multiple maximized windows are supported, but the
user is not able to cycle between them. That is, if Cage is launched
with a terminal emulator and an application is launched from this
terminal emulator, that application is placed "on top" of the terminal
emulator and takes all input until it is closed. When this application
is closed, the terminal emulator becomes visible again.

Cage supports a single, static output. It does not support hotplugging
additional outputs and exits when its only output is removed. Cage
defaults to the output's preferred mode and does not support
rotation. Cage does not support virtual workspaces. Input-wise, Cage
supports pointer input, keyboard input and touch input. Copy and paste
works as well.

There is no configuration for Cage. To start Cage, simply call its
binary with the path to the application you want to launch within the
session. For example, use `cage /usr/bin/epiphany` to launch Cage with
the Epiphany web browser. When the application is closed, Cage closes
as well.

Cage currently does not support any Wayland protocols other than
xdg-shell and XWayland. That is, there is no support for panels,
virtual keyboards, screen capture, primary selection, et cetera. I
welcome pull requests implementing one of the features listed or other
Wayland protocols. The layer-shell protocol especially might make for
a cleaner implementation and virtual keyboard support is definitely
something we want in the future.

Cage is based on the annotated source of tinywl and rootston.

## Installation

For now you'll have to compile Cage from source. There is no release
yet, so you'll have to grab the latest master from
[GitHub](https://github.com/Hjdskes/cage).

You can build Cage with the [Meson](https://mesonbuild.com) build
system. It requires [wlroots](https://github.com/swaywm/wlroots) (and
its dependencies wayland and xkbcommon) to be installed. Simply
execute the following steps to build Cage:

```
$ meson build
$ ninja -C build
```

Cage comes with compile-time support for XWayland. To enable this,
first make sure that your version of wlroots is compiled with this
option. Then, add `-Dxwayland=true` to the `meson` command above. Note
that you'll need to have the XWayland binary installed on your system
for this to work.

You can then run Cage by running `./build/cage /path/to/application
--with=arguments`. If you run Cage from within an existing X11 or
Wayland session, it will open in a virtual output as a window within
your existing session. If you run it from a TTY, it'll run with the
KMS+DRM backend. In debug mode (the default build type with Meson),
press <kbd>Alt</kbd>+<kbd>Esc</kbd> to quit. To build a release build,
use `meson build --buildtype=release`.

## Running Cage with systemd

You might want to start Cage automatically on boot. I have written
such a service for my [home automation](/blog/home-automation)
project. This service logs in as the specified user after boot and
then launches Cage with the specified application. It sets up a full
user session with logind and a custom PAM stack.

You can find the systemd service
[here](https://github.com/Hjdskes/buildroot/blob/hjdskes/board/hjdskes/rpi3/rootfs_overlay/etc/systemd/system/cage%40.service). When
using it, be sure to change the user. You will also need to add the
custom [PAM](http://linux-pam.org/) stack found
[here](https://github.com/Hjdskes/buildroot/blob/hjdskes/board/hjdskes/rpi3/rootfs_overlay/etc/pam.d/cage). This
stack simply logs the user in with pam_unix and then launches a user
session with pam_systemd. Don't forget to enable the service and to
change systemd's default target to `graphical`!

## Bugs

For any bug or feature request, please [create an
issue](https://github.com/Hjdskes/cage/issues/new) on
[GitHub](https://github.com/Hjdskes/cage).

## License

Please see
[LICENSE](https://github.com/Hjdskes/cage/blob/master/LICENSE) on
[GitHub](https://github.com/Hjdskes/cage).

Copyright Â© 2018-2019 Jente Hidskes
[hjdskes@gmail.com](mailto:hjdskes@gmail.com).
